[Music]
a mosquito lands on your arm injects its
chemicals into your skin and begins to
feed you wouldn't even know it was there
if not for the red lump that appears
accompanied by a telltale itch it's a
nuisance but that bump is an important
signal that you're protected by your
immune system your body's major
safeguard against infection illness and
disease
this system is a vast network of cells
tissues and organs that coordinate your
body's defenses against any threats to
your health without it you'd be exposed
to billions of bacteria viruses and
toxins that could make something as
minor as a paper cut or a seasonal cold
fatal the immune system relies on
millions of defensive white blood cells
also known as leukocytes that originate
in our bone marrow these cells migrate
into the bloodstream and the lymphatic
system a network of vessels which helps
clear bodily toxins and waste our bodies
are teeming with leukocytes there are
between 4,000 and 11,000 in every micro
liter of blood as they move around
leukocytes work like security personnel
constantly screening the blood tissues
and organs for suspicious signs this
system mainly relies on cues called
antigens these molecular traces on the
surface of pathogens and other foreign
substances betray the presence of
invaders as soon as the leukocytes
detect them it takes only minutes for
the body's protective immune response to
kick in threats to our bodies are hugely
variable so the immune response has to
be equally adaptable that means relying
on many different types of leukocytes to
tackle threats in different ways despite
this diversity we classify leukocytes in
two main cellular groups which
coordinate a two-pronged attack first
phagocytes trigger the immune response
by sending macrophages and dendritic
cells into the blood as these circulate
they destroy any foreign cells they
encounter simply by consuming them
that allows phagocytes to identify the
antigen on the invaders they just
ingested and transmit this information
to the second major cell group
orchestrating the defense the
lymphocytes a group of lymphocyte cells
called t-cells go in search of infected
body cells and swiftly kill them off
meanwhile b-cells and helper t-cells use
the information gathered from the unique
antigens to start producing special
proteins called antibodies this is the
PS de resistance
each antigen has a unique matching
antibody that can latch onto it like a
lock-and-key and destroy the invading
cells B cells can produce millions of
these which then cycle through the body
and attack the invaders until the worst
of the threat is neutralized
while all of this is going on familiar
symptoms like high temperatures and
swelling are actually processes designed
to aid the immune response a warmer body
makes it harder for bacteria and viruses
to reproduce and spread because their
temperature sensitive and when body
cells are damaged they release chemicals
that make fluid leak into the
surrounding tissues causing swelling
that also attracts phagocytes which
consume the invaders and the damaged
cells usually an immune response will
eradicate a threat within a few days it
won't always stop you from getting ill
but that's not its purpose its actual
job is to stop a threat from escalating
to dangerous levels inside your body and
through constant surveillance over time
the immune system provides another
benefit it helps us develop long term
immunity when B and T cells identify
antigens they can use that information
to recognize invaders in the future so
when a threat revisits the cells can
swiftly deploy the right antibodies to
tackle it before it affects any more
cells that's how you can develop
immunity to certain diseases like
chicken pox it doesn't always work so
well some people have autoimmune
diseases which trick the immune system
into attacking the body's own perfect
healthy cells no one knows exactly what
causes them
but these disorders sabotage the immune
system to varying degrees and underlie
problems like arthritis type 1 diabetes
and multiple sclerosis for most
individuals however a healthy immune
system will successfully fight off an
estimated 300 colds and innumerable
other potential infections over the
course of a lifetime without it those
threats would escalate into something
far more dangerous so the next time you
catch a cold or scratch a mosquito bite
think of the immune system we owe it our
lives ted-ed is a non-profit if you
value our work please consider
supporting it on patreon.com slash
ted-ed
[Music]